---
layout: post
title:  "Scalable Actions for All"
date:   2025-12-29 12:16:00
categories: Github Actions
excerpt: "Setting up GitHub Actions Runner Controller (ARC) on a cheap VPS with K3s to run scalable, self-hosted GitHub Actions runners with Docker-in-Docker support."
---

# Running My GitHub Actions Runners on a Cheap VPS with K3s and the Github Actions ARC 

Can I run my own GitHub Actions runners, on a single cheap VPS, using the latest tools?

This post is about how that actually went.


The High-Level Plan: 

The architecture I had in mind was pretty reasonable:
 - Use my existing VPS running docker with enough ram for a few runners
 - [GitHub Actions Runner Controller (ARC)][https://docs.github.com/en/actions/tutorials/use-actions-runner-controller/quickstart] to manage runners
 - Docker in Docker support, because most real CI pipelines need Docker, but I don't want to deal with comflicting port mappings
 - Auto-scaling runners, I'd like to be able to run some concurrent jobs and not get stuck in waiting hell.


## Choosing Authentication: GitHub App, Not Tokens

One early decision that paid off was using a GitHub App instead of a personal access token.

GitHub strongly nudges you in this direction now, and for good reason:
 - Scoped permissions
 - Easier rotation
 - No long-lived user credentials floating around (and no debugging when they exipire)

Creating the app itself is straightforward, and GitHub’s documentation walks through it well. This is the guide I followed and would recommend bookmarking:

https://docs.github.com/en/apps/creating-github-apps/creating-a-github-app

The only thing I’ll emphasize here — because it does matter later — is that:
 - The App must be installed on the org (or repo)
 - You need the App ID, Installation ID, and private key
 - Those values must be available to ARC, this is easiest as a Kubernetes secret

I also chose to make the app only installable on the org i was targeting, i can create as many apps as i need for each org i want to use my own runners on


## K3s Was Easy...

Installing K3s on a VPS was refreshingly boring. That’s a compliment.

Within minutes I had:
 - A single-node cluster
 - A working kubeconfig
 - Core system pods running

At this point, I installed cert-manager via Helm (as required by ARC), installed the ARC controller via Helm, and created my runner scale set.

Everything looked healthy.

And yet… no runners appeared in GitHub. 
 - No failed pods.
 - No crashing containers.

Just… nothing.

Eventually, the logs told the real story.

ARC was trying to talk to the GitHub API — and failing, butcouldn’t resolve api.github.com.

In my case:
 - CoreDNS was running
 - The kube-dns service existed
 - Pods could talk to each other
 - But DNS queries from pods never made it out of the node

What bit me here is that I had firewalld set up for docker on the host already, and had locked it down to avoid accidentaly exposing containers to the internet (and becoming a monero miner)

Once I added the k3s interfaced to the correct zone using firewall-cmd i was able to run a busybox image and verify that dns was working in pods.

## The Short Short Version

Instal cert-manager
```sh
helm install \
  cert-manager oci://quay.io/jetstack/charts/cert-manager \
  --version v1.19.2 \
  --namespace cert-manager \
  --create-namespace \
  --set crds.enabled=true
```

Install arc-system

```sh
helm install arc \
    --namespace "arc-systems" \
    --create-namespace \
    oci://ghcr.io/actions/actions-runner-controller-charts/gha-runner-scale-set-controller
```

Create the secret using the values from earlier

```sh
kubectl create namespace my-org-arc
kubectl create secret generic my-org-arc-github-app \
  -n my-org-arc \
  --from-literal=github_app_id='*****' \
  --from-literal=github_app_installation_id='**********' \
  --from-file=github_app_private_key=./my-org-arc.2025-12-28.private-key.pem
```

The final helm values that i used and saved as `arcvalues.yaml`

```yaml
githubConfigUrl: "https://github.com/my-org"
githubConfigSecret: my-org-arc-github-app
minRunners: 2
maxRunners: 6
containerMode:
  type: dind
```

Install the runner scale set

```sh
helm install my-org-arc \
  oci://ghcr.io/actions/actions-runner-controller-charts/gha-runner-scale-set \
  -n my-org-arc -f arcvalues.yaml
```

and thats it, now you can use an action and set runs-on to your own runners

```yaml
name: Actions Runner Controller Demo
on:
  workflow_dispatch:

jobs:
  Explore-GitHub-Actions:
    # You need to use the INSTALLATION_NAME from the previous step
    runs-on: my-org-arc
    steps:
    - run: echo "🎉 This job uses runner scale set runners!"
```
